docs: add server concept (#23372)
nuxt/nuxt: docs/1.getting-started/8.server.md

With Nitro, you can easily manage the server part of your Nuxt app, from API endpoints to middleware.

Both endpoints and middleware can be defined like this:

```ts [server/api/test.ts]
export default defineEventHandler({
  // ... Do whatever you want here
})
```

And you can directly return `text`, `json`, `html` or even a `stream`.

Out-of-the-box, Nitro supports **hot module replacement** and **auto-import** like the other parts of your Nuxt application.

::ReadMore{link="/docs/guide/directory-structure/server"}
::

## Universal Deployment

Nitro offers the ability to deploy your Nuxt app anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time of just a few milliseconds. That's fast!

Today, Nitro offers more than 15 presets to build your Nuxt app for different cloud providers and servers, including:

- [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/)
- [Netlify Functions](https://www.netlify.com/products/functions/)
- [Vercel Edge Network](https://vercel.com/docs/edge-network/introduction)

Or for other runtimes:

- [Deno](https://deno.land/)
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/)

::ReadMore{link="/docs/getting-started/deployment"}
::

## Hybrid Rendering

> Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt app? Nitro covers your back!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do you need both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt app? Nitro has your back!
```

Nitro has a powerful feature called `routeRules` which allows you to define a set of rules to customize how each route of your Nuxt app is rendered (and more).

```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  routeRules: {
    '/': { prerender: true }, // Generated at build time for SEO purpose
    '/api/*': { cache: { maxAge: 60 * 60 } } // Cached for 1 hour
    '/old-page': { redirect: { to: { '/new-page', status: 302 } } // Redirection to avoid 404
    // ...
  }
})
```

> [More rules are available](https://nuxt.com/docs/guide/concepts/rendering#hybrid-rendering) to customize the rendering mode of your routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[More rules are available](https://nuxt.com/docs/guide/concepts/rendering#hybrid-rendering) to customize the rendering mode of your routes. Note that some rules (for example, `ssr` and `experimentalNoScripts`) are not Nitro rules but affect Nuxt's behavior when rendering your pages to HTML.
```

---
navigation.icon: uil:laptop-connection
description: Build full-stack applications, fetch data from your database, create APIs, or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.
---

# Server

Nuxt's server framework allows you to build **full-stack applications**. For example, you can fetch data from a database or another server, create an API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or an RSS feed - all from a single codebase.

> ::alert{type="info"}
> For more information about the `~/server` directory, please visit the [server directory structure section](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).
> ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::ReadMore{link="/docs/guide/directory-structure/server"}
::
```

## Powered by Nitro

Nuxt's server is [Nitro](https://github.com/unjs/nitro). Nitro was originally created for Nuxt but is now part of [UnJS](https://unjs.io/) and used for other frameworks - and can even be used on its own.

> Using Nitro give Nuxt superpowers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Nitro gives Nuxt superpowers:
```

- Full control of the server-side part of your app

> - Deploy your app anywhere

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Universal deployment on any provider (many zero-config)
```

> - Hybrid rendering for your app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Hybrid rendering
```

## Full control of the server-side part of your app

With Nitro, you can easily manage the server-side of your Nuxt 3 app; from endpoints to middleware.

Both endpoints and middleware can be defined like this:

```ts [server/api/test.ts]
export default defineEventHandler({
  // ... Do whatever you want here
})
```

And you can directly return `text`, `json`, `html` or even a `stream`.

Out-of-the-box, Nitro supports **hot module replacement** and **auto-import** like the other parts of your Nuxt application.

> ::alert{type="info"}
> Learn more about endpoints and middlewares in [the server directory structure section](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).
> ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::ReadMore{link="/docs/guide/directory-structure/server"}
::
```

> ## Deploy your app anywhere

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Universal deployment
```

> Nitro offers the ability to deploy your Nuxt 3 anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time near to a few milliseconds. That's fast!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nitro offers the ability to deploy your Nuxt app anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time of just a few milliseconds. That's fast!
```

> Today, Nitro offers more than 15 presets to build your Nuxt 3 app for different cloud providers and servers, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, Nitro offers more than 15 presets to build your Nuxt app for different cloud providers and servers, including:
```

- [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/)
- [Netlify Functions](https://www.netlify.com/products/functions/)
- [Vercel Edge Network](https://vercel.com/docs/edge-network/introduction)

Or for other runtimes:

- [Deno](https://deno.land/)
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/)

> ::alert{type="info"}
> Learn more about deployment in [the related section](https://nuxt.com/docs/getting-started/deployment).
> ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::ReadMore{link="/docs/getting-started/deployment"}
::
```

> ## Hybrid rendering for your app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Hybrid Rendering
```

> Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt 3 app? Nitro covers your back!
> 
> Nitro has a powerful feature called `routeRules` which allow you to define a set of rules to customize the routes rendering mode of your Nuxt 3 app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt app? Nitro covers your back!

Nitro has a powerful feature called `routeRules` which allows you to define a set of rules to customize how each route of your Nuxt app is rendered (and more).
```

Reviewer 2: I'd even change the start to 
"Need both static and..."

Author: Not an expert enough to know! 🤷‍♂️

```ts [nuxt.config.ts]
export default defineNuxtConfig({
  routeRules: {
    '/': { prerender: true }, // Generated at build time for SEO purpose
    '/api/*': { cache: { maxAge: 60 * 60 } } // Cached for 1 hour
    '/old-page': { redirect: { to: { '/new-page', status: 302 } } // Redirection to avoid 404
    // ...
  }
})
```

[More rules are available](https://nuxt.com/docs/guide/concepts/rendering#hybrid-rendering) to customize the rendering mode of your routes.

Nitro is used to build the app for server side rendering, as well as pre-rendering.

> ::alert{type="info"}
> Learn more about rendering in [the related section](https://nuxt.com/docs/guide/concepts/rendering).
> ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::ReadMore{link="/docs/guide/concepts/rendering"}
::
```

---
navigation.icon: uil:laptop-connection
description: Build full-stack applications, fetch data from your database, create APIs, or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.
---

# Server

The ability to create, within your app, server endpoints is one of the new core feature of Nuxt 3. It allows you to **build full-stack applications**, fetch data from a database or another server, create an API or even generate static server-side content like a sitemap or a RSS feed, from a single codebase.

::alert{type="info"}
For more informations about usage of the `~/server` directory, please visit the [server directory structure section](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).
::

## Powered by Nitro

> Nuxt 3 server-side features are powered by [Nitro](https://github.com/unjs/nitro), a [UnJS](https://unjs.io) project, while the client side features are powered by [Vite](https://vitejs.dev) or [webpack](https://webpack.js.org).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nuxt 3 server-side features are powered by [unjs/nitro](https://nitro.unjs.io/), while the client-side features are powered by [Vite](https://vitejs.dev) or [webpack](https://webpack.js.org).
```

::alert{type="info"}
Note that Nitro is framework agnostic and can be used without Nuxt.
::

> Using [Nitro](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) give Nuxt superpowers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using Nitro give Nuxt superpowers:
```

- Full control of the server-side part of your app
- Deploy your app anywhere
- Hybrid rendering for your app

## Full control of the server-side part of your app

With Nitro, you can easily manage the server-side of your Nuxt 3 app; from endpoints to middleware.

Both endpoints and middleware can be defined like this:

> ```ts [server/{routes,middleware}/index.ts]

Reviewer 3: using routes/index.ts overrides Nuxt behavior which is not safe also middleware are mostly a compact feature probably not best to advertise.

```suggestion
```ts [server/api/test.ts]
```

export default defineEventHandler({
  // ... Do whatever you want here
})
```

And you can directly return `text`, `json`, `html` or even a `stream`.

Out-of-the-box, Nitro supports **hot module replacement** and **auto-import** like the other parts of your Nuxt application.

::alert{type="info"}
Learn more about endpoints and middlewares in [the server directory structure section](/docs/guide/directory-structure/server).
::

## Deploy your app anywhere

> [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) offer the ability to deploy your Nuxt 3 anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time near to 1ms. That's fast!

Author: ```suggestion
Nitro offers the ability to deploy your Nuxt 3 anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time near to a few milliseconds. That's fast!
```

> [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) offer the ability to deploy your Nuxt 3 anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time near to 1ms. That's fast!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Nitro offers the ability to deploy your Nuxt 3 anywhere, from a bare metal server to the edge network, with a start time near to a few milliseconds, That's fast!
```

Author: I the comma after milliseconds really wanted? 🤔

Reviewer 3: It was Grammarly i guess

> Today, [`Nitro`](https://github.com/unjs/nitro) offers more than 15 presets to build your Nuxt 3 app for different cloud providers and servers, including:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Today, Nitro offers more than 15 presets to build your Nuxt 3 app for different cloud providers and servers, including:
```

- [Cloudflare Workers](https://workers.cloudflare.com/)
- [Netlify Functions](https://www.netlify.com/products/functions/)
- [Vercel Edge Network](https://vercel.com/docs/edge-network/introduction)

> - [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/)

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - [IIS](https://www.iis.net/)

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - [IIS](https://www.iis.net/)

Reviewer 3: Let's remove IIS and AWS lambda. Nither are stable today (AWS lambda as standalone)

Or for other runtime:

- [Deno](https://deno.land/)
- [Bun](https://bun.sh/)

::alert{type="info"}
Learn more about deployment in [the related section](https://nuxt.com/docs/getting-started/deployment).
::

## Hybrid rendering for your app

Need for both static and dynamic pages in your Nuxt 3 app? Nitro covers your back!

> Nitro has a powerful feature called `routeRules` which allow you to define a set of rules to customize the routes rendering mode of your Nuxt 3 app.

Reviewer 3: We need to refine this later once we have universal route rules, nitro is not only place that benefits nuxt users with routeRules
